[KB-276] Feedback (#177)
chhoumann/thesis-chemcam: report_thesis/src/sections/proposed_approach/testing_validation.tex

This section describes the validation and testing procedures our experiments follow.
Selecting appropriate testing procedures is crucial for ensuring the validity and reliability of the results.
For that reason, we delineate a methodological approach that ensures our models are accurate and generalizable.
We begin by outlining our general strategy for model evaluation.
Next, we describe the procedure used to partition our dataset into training, validation, and testing sets.
Finally, we present the evaluation metrics used to assess the performance of our models.

We have chosen to test and evaluate all our experiments using both cross-validation and a separate test set.
Evaluating results solely on the test set could lead to models that are overly specialized to the test set.
This occurs when searching for the optimal configuration of hyperparameters specifically tailored to the test set.
For this reason, it is common to use a validation set to tune hyperparameters and evaluate model performance during experimentation.

> However, further splitting the training set into a validation set exacerbates the challenges of limited data availability, as described in Section~\ref{subsec:challenges}.

Reviewer: You make a valid point about the fact that splitting the data exacerbates the problem of limited data, but I dont feel like you properly address in the final paragraph how k-fold-cross-validation is a trade off thats worth in. It makes this sentence seem like its completely independent.

I would prefer to see a callback to this sentence somewhere below.

Author: Nice catch, I didn't actually follow up on that, which I had planned. It's a quick fix, though:

```diff
- This allows us to train our models on $k-1$ folds and evaluate them on the remaining fold, which provides a more robust estimate of model performance.
+ This allows us to train our models on $k-1$ folds and evaluate them on the remaining fold, which provides a more robust estimate of model performance, and allows us to use all the data for training.
```

Pushed :)

Author: Thoughts?

Reviewer: Hm, closer, but still not quite there in my opinion. 
I would have expected there to be a line somewhere saying something like:
"Using k-fold ... allows us to make full utility of the limited data"

this is very rough, but I hope you get the idea.

Author: I've concluded on that later. In the discussion.

In each iteration, models and preprocessors would need to be refit, making this approach too computationally expensive and time-consuming for the scope of our study.

While we employ conventional techniques like holdout sets and k-fold cross validation, the dataset we use imposes additional challenges to the process.

One of the primary challenges is preventing data leakage.
As per concentration matrix $\mathbf{C}$ in Section~\ref{sec:problem_definition}, each target only has one ground truth concentration value per oxide.
However, each target is shot at multiple locations, resulting in multiple instances of the same target in the dataset, as shown in Table~\ref{tab:final_dataset_example}.
Although the intensity values vary for each location, they fundamentally represent measurements of the same target.
If we were to randomly split the dataset, some locations from a target could end up in the testing set while others remain in the training set.
This would cause data leakage, as the testing set would no longer consist solely of unseen targets.
To prevent this, we ensure that each target is represented only once in the dataset by grouping data from all locations on a given target.

> Furthermore, the limited availability of data, as mentioned in Section~\ref{sec:problem_definition}, poses another significant challenge due to the difficult collection process.

Reviewer: I see what you are trying to get at with the difficult collection process, but I feel like the way its phrased makes it seem like you want to talk about the collection process, but then you go into describing the size of the dataset without really connecting it to this point, which is: The collection process is difficult - Therefore we only have 408 samples. The fact that we only have such few samples means distribute the extreme values properly.

Author: I just removed the part about the collection process. Thoughts?
And since we mention the limited data already on line 13, we can also remove the extra `as mentioned in`.

```diff
- Furthermore, the limited availability of data, as mentioned in Section~\ref{sec:problem_definition}, poses another significant challenge due to the difficult collection process.
+ Furthermore, the limited availability of data poses another significant challenge.
```

I pushed this. Thoughts?

The dataset we use consists of 408 samples, which is relatively large by \gls{libs} standards.
However, there are only a few samples with concentration values for the oxides in the targets that are either very high or very low compared to the rest of the data, which we refer to as \textit{extreme values}.
These infrequent high and low concentration values can be problematic.
If such values end up in the test set, the model may be evaluated on data points outside the range it was trained on.
This situation can lead to an inaccurate assessment of the model's performance, as it might not handle these uncommon concentration ranges effectively.

When performing a random split of the dataset into multiple folds for cross-validation, as well as for training and testing sets, this small number of extreme values can result in an uneven distribution.
The presence or absence of these extreme values in any given fold can heavily influence the model's performance metrics.
If extreme values are disproportionately allocated to the testing set, the resulting model may struggle to generalize accurately.

> This uneven distribution can lead to models that perform well on the majority of the data but fail to predict accurately for these extreme concentration values, which are critical in many practical applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This uneven distribution can lead to models that perform well on the majority of the data but fail to predict accurately for these extreme concentration values.
```

I think saying "which is critical in many applications" is a strong enough claim to warrant a source, but at the same time I dont think it adds anything to the sentence. Therefore, I suggest just removing it.

Author: I'm for this change, but then I'd like to hear your thoughts on this line:

> This is prudent because, in many practical applications, the reliability of the model on typical data points is more critical than its performance on rare extremes.

Context: https://github.com/chhoumann/thesis-chemcam/blob/a26dbc6d3d2a7fa5899e75a4ef988e10cae3a339/report_thesis/src/sections/proposed_approach/testing_validation.tex#L141

Reviewer: Ah, forgot to add a comment about that cause I was so focused on the "Test Full" in the graphs.
Yes I think this falls in the same category.

Reviewer: Just had a thought - Is it possible to maybe rephrase the second one more in terms of "We found that the reliability of the model.... etc" ? I think that could work here.

Author: Done

This step ensures that each group is uniquely identified and ordered appropriately.
The dataset we illustrate in Table~\ref{tab:final_dataset_example} would require a group column $g$ of "\texttt{Target}" to group the data by target.
The target column $t$ refers to the column with the target variable, which would be the oxide for which we are predicting the concentration, for example, \ce{SiO_2}.
By sorting the dataset by the target column $t$, we ensure that the data is ordered by the target concentration values in ascending order.

Fold numbers are then assigned sequentially using a modulo operation to ensure a random-like distribution of the unique targets across the folds (Line~\ref{line:assign_folds}).
This means that, while the assignment process follows a sequence, the resulting distribution of targets is effectively randomized.
Fold numbers start in 0 and go up to $k-1$, as implied by the modulo operation.
If a percentile $p$ is provided, extreme value handling is enabled, and the algorithm identifies the top and bottom percentiles of the target values (Line~\ref{line:identify_extremes}).

> These extreme values are then reassigned to the training folds (0 to $k-2$), ensuring they are evenly distributed across these folds (Line~\ref{line:reassign_extremes}).

Author: I prefer to avoid fancy words for simplicity. What about this?

```suggestion
These extreme values are then reassigned to the training folds (0 to $k-2$), ensuring they are as evenly distributed as possible across these folds (Line~\ref{line:reassign_extremes}).
```

The fold assignments are then merged into the original dataset, as described in Line~\ref{line:merge_folds}.
Essentially, this step enables the partitioning steps that follow, by ensuring each data item has an associated fold number.

> Following this, the dataset is divided into a test set, which always consists of the data points assigned to fold $k-1$, and the remaining data forms the training set, as outlined in Line~\ref{line:split_dataset}.

Reviewer: Reads a little better this way I feel.
```suggestion
Following this, the dataset is divided into a train and test set.
The test set always consists of the data points assigned to fold $k-1$ and the remaining data forms the training set, as outlined in Line~\ref{line:split_dataset}.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Following this, the dataset is divided into a train and test set, as outlined in Line~\ref{line:split_dataset}.
The test set consists of the data points assigned to fold $k-1$, and the remaining folds forms the training set.
```

The training data is further divided into $k-1$ sets for cross-validation. 

> For each fold $i$ where $i \in \{0, 1, \ldots, k-2\}$, we create a cross-validation training set $\mathbf{T}_\text{train}[i]$ by excluding the $i$-th fold from the set of $k-1$ folds, and use the $i$-th fold as the validation set $\mathbf{T}_\text{val}[i]$.

Reviewer: This sentence reads a little weird. Maybe I am just not getting it, but using the $i$-th fold for the training set and the $i$-th fold as validation set, sounds to me like we are using the same fold for both.

Author: It says:
- create train set from all folds but $i$
- val from $i$

Need to read the `excluding` part

These pairs of training and validation sets are then appended to the list of cross-validation sets $\mathbf{T}_\text{cv}$ (Line~\ref{line:create_folds}).

Finally, the fold indicator column is removed from all datasets before returning the final partitions (Line~\ref{line:remove_fold_column}).
The fold indicator column was added to keep track of which data points belong to which folds, which is crucial for ensuring that data points are correctly partitioned into their respective training and test sets during cross-validation. 
This cleanup step ensures that the fold information does not interfere with subsequent data processing or model training.

The final output of this procedure consists of:
\begin{itemize}
    \item A set of tuples \(\mathbf{T}_\text{cv}\), where each tuple contains a training set and a validation set.
    \item The overall training set \(\mathbf{D}_\text{train}\), consisting of all the data points not in the test set.
    \item The test set \(\mathbf{D}_\text{test}\), distinct from the training set.
\end{itemize}

> The data partitioning does not modify the original dataset; it merely partitions it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data partitioning algorithm does not modify the original dataset; it merely partitions it.
```

For that reason, each of the datasets that are returned has the same structure as shown in Table~\ref{tab:final_dataset_example}.

Given that the data partitioning procedure aims to distribute extreme concentration values evenly among the training folds while minimizing their presence in the test set, it is crucial to determine an optimal value of $p$ that minimizes the number of extreme values in the test set while still maintaining its general representativeness.
By general representativeness, we mean ensuring that the test set reflects the general distribution of the dataset without being skewed by extreme values.

> This balance is essential for accurately assessing the model's performance on typical data points.

Reviewer: I dont know how, but I feel like this could shortened down a fair bit. Its a lot of text to say that $p$ has a big influence on minimizing the extreme values in the test set.

Author: I'm also unsure how.

It's not just that it's an important variable to optimize to minimize the extreme values. That would be trivial. Just set it really high.

The point is that you have to _maximize_ the _general_ representativeness while _minimizing_ the amount of extreme values present in the test set.

Also don't want to spend a ton more time on this sentence, as defining this + the places that rely on it took a while... as the trade-offs section relies on `general representativeness` as well.

This is prudent because, in many practical applications, the reliability of the model on typical data points is more critical than its performance on rare extremes.
By using cross-validation in conjunction with a separate test set, we ensure that the model is robust and performs well under typical conditions.

However, it is important to recognize the limitation of this approach: excluding extreme values from the test set means we can only confidently assess the model's performance within the test set's range.
If predictions fall outside this range, we cannot reliably assert their accuracy, as the model has not been fully evaluated on such data.
This could potentially reduce the model's usefulness in scenarios where predictions on extreme values are critical.
Nevertheless, cross-validation partially mitigates this issue by allowing the model to learn from extreme values during the training and validation phases, thereby improving its robustness.

> Metrics obtained from cross-validation provide a broader view of the model's accuracy and robustness across the entire dataset, including extreme values.

Reviewer: I am honestly not sure what to think about this bit here. While its extremely well written, I feel like we are repeating what has already been said several times, but in a different order.
What is the goal with this part? Is it to summarize? If yes, then I almost feel like the summary is as long as the text that first described these concepts.
If no, then what is being added here that the reader didnt already know from what was read not too long ago?

I might be wrong, but it almost feels like we are so afraid that its not obvious what we are trying to do that we overcompensate and lose a lot of precision in the process.

I feel like you could take some of these points made here and perhaps bolster the arguments made earlier and then cut down on a lot of text.

What do you think?

\subsubsection{Dataset Partitioning}\label{subsubsec:dataset_partitioning}
To ensure rigorous evaluation of our models and to address the challenges of data leakage and uneven distribution of extreme values, we have implemented a customized k-fold data partitioning procedure. 
This approach divides the dataset into $k$ folds, which it uses to define cross-validation data sets, as well as a training set and a test set.
The procedure ensures that all data points from a given target are only present in one of the $k$ folds, overcoming the challenge of data leakage we mention above.
Additionally, it ensures that extreme values are handled by redistributing them evenly across the training folds, preventing any single fold from being disproportionately influenced by these values.

\begin{algorithm}
\caption{Data Partitioning With Extreme Value Handling}
\label{alg:custom_kfold_cv}
\begin{algorithmic}[1]
\Require Dataset $\mathbf{D}$, group column $g$, target column $t$, number of splits $k$, percentile $p$, random seed $\textit{seed}$

> \Ensure Training and validation sets for cross-validation $\mathbf{T}_\text{cv}$, training set $\mathbf{D}_\text{train}$, and test set $\mathbf{D}_\text{test}$

Author: Modified to clarify that we don't return 'folds,' which is ambiguous as to what we mean - is it indices? data? ranges?

So now we explicitly clarify that it's data partitions

    \State \label{line:reassign_extremes} Reassign extreme values to folds $0$ to $k-2$
\EndIf
\State \label{line:merge_folds} Merge fold assignments information into the original dataset
\State \label{line:split_dataset} Split dataset into test set $\mathbf{D}_\text{test}$ (fold $k-1$) and remaining data $\mathbf{D}_\text{train}$
\State \label{line:create_folds} Create $k-1$ training and validation sets
\For{each fold $i$ from 0 to $k-2$}
    \State $\mathbf{T}_\text{train}[i] \gets \mathbf{D}_\text{train} \setminus \text{fold}_i$
    \State $\mathbf{T}_\text{val}[i] \gets \text{fold}_i$
    \State Append $(\mathbf{T}_\text{train}[i], \mathbf{T}_\text{val}[i])$ to $\mathbf{T}_\text{cv}$
\EndFor
\State \label{line:remove_fold_column} Remove fold column from all datasets
\State \Return $\mathbf{T}_\text{cv}, \mathbf{D}_\text{train}, \mathbf{D}_\text{test}$
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}

The procedure outlined in Algorithm~\ref{alg:custom_kfold_cv} begins by setting a random seed for reproducibility if one is provided (Line~\ref{line:seed}).
This ensures that the results are consistent across different runs of the algorithm.

> Next, the dataset is processed to remove any duplicate entries based on the group column $g$ and then sorted by the target column $t$ (Line~\ref{line:remove_duplicates}).

Author: Added these because it can be hard to distinguish between when we're referencing the dataset and variables in the algorithm

If a percentile $p$ is provided, extreme value handling is enabled, and the algorithm identifies the top and bottom percentiles of the target values (Line~\ref{line:identify_extremes}).
These extreme values are then reassigned to the training folds (0 to $k-2$), ensuring they are evenly distributed across these folds (Line~\ref{line:reassign_extremes}).

The fold assignments are then merged into the original dataset, as described in Line~\ref{line:merge_folds}.
Essentially, this step enables the partitioning steps that follow, by ensuring each data item has an associated fold number.
Following this, the dataset is divided into a test set, which always consists of the data points assigned to fold $k-1$, and the remaining data forms the training set, as outlined in Line~\ref{line:split_dataset}.
The training data is further divided into $k-1$ sets for cross-validation. 
For each fold $i$ where $i \in \{0, 1, \ldots, k-2\}$, we create a cross-validation training set $\mathbf{T}_\text{train}[i]$ by excluding the $i$-th fold from the set of $k-1$ folds, and use the $i$-th fold as the validation set $\mathbf{T}_\text{val}[i]$.

> These pairs of training and validation sets are then appended to the list of cross-validation sets $\mathbf{T}_\text{cv}$ (Line~\ref{line:create_folds}).

Author: Tried to spell out the process here (rel: ambiguous what we actually returned)

By general representativeness, we mean ensuring that the test set reflects the general distribution of the dataset without being skewed by extreme values.
This balance is essential for accurately assessing the model's performance on typical data points.

Our method for handling extreme values ensures that the test set does not include samples outside the range seen in the training set.
This approach addresses several critical challenges and represents a deliberate trade-off to improve the reliability of our model evaluation:

Firstly, it mitigates the risk of uneven distribution of extreme values, which can disproportionately affect model performance metrics.
If extreme values are unevenly distributed between the training and test sets, the evaluation of the model can be heavily skewed, leading to unreliable and misleading performance metrics.
By redistributing extreme values evenly across the training folds, we ensure a more balanced and fair assessment of the model's capabilities during cross-validation.

> Secondly, this trade-off allows for a more stable and reliable assessment of the model's performance on typical data points.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secondly, this trade-off ensures a more stable and reliable assessment of the model's performance on typical data points.
```

> While the test set may be less representative of the full range of data, particularly regarding the rare extreme values, the evaluation focuses on the model's ability to generalize from the training data to new data within the same distribution range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although the test set may be less representative of the full range of data, particularly concerning the rare extreme values, the evaluation focuses on the model's ability to generalize from the training data to new data within the same distribution range.
```

This is prudent because, in many practical applications, the reliability of the model on typical data points is more critical than its performance on rare extremes.
By using cross-validation in conjunction with a separate test set, we ensure that the model is robust and performs well under typical conditions.

> However, it is important to recognize the limitation this approach introduces: excluding extreme values from the test set means we can only confidently assess the model's performance within the range of the test set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it is important to recognize the limitation of this approach: excluding extreme values from the test set means we can only confidently assess the model's performance within the test set's range.
```

> If we receive predictions outside this range, we cannot reliably assert their accuracy, as the model has not been fully evaluated on such data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If predictions fall outside this range, we cannot reliably assert their accuracy, as the model has not been fully evaluated on such data.
```

> This could potentially make the model less useful in scenarios where predictions on extreme values are critical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This could potentially reduce the model's usefulness in scenarios where predictions on extreme values are critical.
```

Nevertheless, cross-validation partially mitigates this issue by allowing the model to learn from extreme values during the training and validation phases, thereby improving its robustness.

> Metrics obtained from cross-validation provide a broader picture of the model's accuracy and robustness across the entire dataset, including extreme values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metrics obtained from cross-validation provide a broader view of the model's accuracy and robustness across the entire dataset, including extreme values.
```

> Therefore, although our approach may make the test set less representative of the full dataset, it is a deliberate trade-off aimed at achieving a more accurate and reliable evaluation of the model's generalization performance.

Author: Added a discussion of the tradeoffs for our method, which I thought it was very important to highlight. It isn't perfect, but it's the most-ideal we've found. Need to highlight that. 

Please read this thoroughly! Would really like to hear your feedback on this. Does it make sense? Do the claims follow from our reasoning?

Reviewer 2: Very good overall IMO, some very slight/minor phrasing issues which I have attempted to correct through my suggestions.

> Therefore, although our approach may make the test set less representative of the full dataset, it is a deliberate trade-off aimed at achieving a more accurate and reliable evaluation of the model's generalization performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, although our approach may render the test set less representative of the full dataset, it is a deliberate trade-off aimed at achieving a more accurate and reliable evaluation of the model's generalization performance.
```

Our method is inspired by the approach described by \citet{andersonImprovedAccuracyQuantitative2017}.
They employed a similar strategy to assess the performance of their PLS model, using k-fold cross-validation and a separate test set.
Their process involved dividing the full set of laboratory data into five folds, using four for cross-validation and combining them as the final training set, while the fifth fold served as a test set.
For consistency, we also use $k = 5$ for our data partitioning.

> Given that the $k$-th fold is used as the test set, having $k=5$ results in 4 folds for cross-validation.

Reviewer 2: You use a space elsewhere so probably should here too? 
Don't think it even affects the rendered PDF but just to make sure.
```suggestion
Given that the $k$-th fold is used as the test set, having $k = 5$ results in 4 folds for cross-validation.
```

> Additionally, by using $k = 5$ folds, we have effectively chosen an 80\%/20\% split between the training and testing datasets.

Reviewer 2: You already said this earlier on line 21, is there any reason to mention it again?

Author: Removed the one on line 21

    \[
    \texttt{rmse\_cv} = \frac{1}{k} \sum_{n=1}^{k} \texttt{rmse\_cv\_n}
    \]
    and
    \[
    \texttt{std\_dev\_cv} = \frac{1}{k} \sum_{n=1}^{k} \texttt{std\_dev\_cv\_n}
    \]
    where \(k\) is the total number of folds.
    \item \textbf{Test Set \gls{rmse} and Standard Deviation:} The \gls{rmse} and standard deviation are also computed for the test set, denoted as \texttt{rmsep} and \texttt{std\_dev}, to provide a measure of the model's performance on unseen data.
\end{enumerate}

Given that our data partitioning method moves the most extreme values into the training data, this naturally results in the testing data being closer to the mean of the data distribution, making it easier to predict.
In practice, this would result in lower \texttt{rmsep} and \texttt{std\_dev} values compared to the cross validation metrics.
Therefore, evaluating the model's performance using both the cross-validation metrics (\texttt{rmse\_cv} and \texttt{std\_dev\_cv}) and the test set metrics (\texttt{rmsep} and \texttt{std\_dev}) is crucial.

> The cross-validation metrics provide insights into the model's stability across different subsets, while the test set metrics offer a final measure of performance on truly unseen data, giving a comprehensive assessment of the model's generalizability.

Author: This part has been rewritten to narrow down on the effects of our approach & kinda return to the discussion of tradeoffs. Want to round-off and conclude why it's so important we use both RMSEP and CV.

Am I being clear enough with regard to why it's important?

> Given that our data partitioning method moves the most extreme values into the training data, this naturally results in the testing data being closer to the mean of the data distribution, making it easier to predict.
> In practice, this would result in lower \texttt{rmsep} and \texttt{std\_dev} values compared to the cross validation metrics.
> Therefore, evaluating the model's performance using both the cross-validation metrics (\texttt{rmse\_cv} and \texttt{std\_dev\_cv}) and the test set metrics (\texttt{rmsep} and \texttt{std\_dev}) is crucial.
> The cross-validation metrics provide insights into the model's stability across different subsets, while the test set metrics offer a final measure of performance on truly unseen data, giving a comprehensive assessment of the model's generalizability.

Reviewer 2: Some suggestions on rephrasing to make it a bit clearer, but overall I think it's good.
```suggestion
Since our data partitioning method allocates the most extreme values to the training data, the testing data tends to be closer to the mean of the data distribution, making it easier to predict.
In practice, this results in lower \texttt{rmsep} and \texttt{std\_dev} values compared to the cross-validation metrics.
Therefore, it is crucial to evaluate the model's performance using both the cross-validation metrics (\texttt{rmse\_cv} and \texttt{std\_dev\_cv}) and the test set metrics (\texttt{rmsep} and \texttt{std\_dev}).
Cross-validation metrics provide insights into the model's stability across different subsets, while the test set metrics offer a final measure of performance on truly unseen data, providing a comprehensive assessment of the model's generalizability.
```

The first challenge concerned data leakage. We believe our method effectively handles this issue without significant trade-offs.
The second challenge we presented is the trade-off between having a representative training set that includes extreme values, thereby avoiding overfitting, and ensuring the test set is sufficiently challenging to accurately assess the model's generalization across the full range of data variability.
We will further examine this trade-off below.

Our method for partitioning mitigates the risk of uneven distribution of extreme values, which can disproportionately affect model performance metrics.
If extreme values are unevenly distributed between the training and test sets, the evaluation of the model can be heavily skewed, leading to unreliable and misleading performance metrics.
By redistributing extreme values evenly across the training folds, we ensure a more balanced and fair assessment of the model's capabilities during cross-validation.
However, excluding extreme values from the test set may limit the test set's ability to challenge the model fully.

> Our method for handling extreme values ensures that the test set does not include samples outside the range seen in the training set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our method for handling extreme values, means that the test set does not include samples outside the range seen in the training set.
```
